Well, let’s talk
about the disfellowshipping arrangement.
To begin, it would be good to read
the Scriptural basis for disfellowshipping.
It is found in 1 Corinthians chapter 5,
so if you would like to open
your Bibles there,
we will start reading with verse 9
of 1 Corinthians 5.
It says (and this is the apostle Paul
writing under inspiration):
“In my letter I wrote you
to stop keeping company
“with sexually immoral people,
“not meaning entirely
“with the sexually
immoral people of this world
“or the greedy people
or extortioners or idolaters.
Otherwise, you would actually
have to get out of the world.”
Well, Christians do not hold themselves
aloof from non-Witnesses.
We have normal contacts with neighbors,
workmates, schoolmates,
and others, and we witness to them.
Even if some
of them are living immoral lives,
we cannot avoid them completely.
It is different, though,
with a brother who lives like that.
Verse 11 continues:
“But now I am writing you
to stop keeping company
“with anyone called a brother
who is sexually immoral
“or a greedy person or an idolater
“or a reviler
or a drunkard or an extortioner,
not even eating with such a man.”
And so at the end of verse 13,
he adds: “Remove the wicked person
from among yourselves.”
Notice that this inspired instruction
is worded as a command, not a suggestion.
This matter
was nicely explained in the article
“Why Disfellowshipping Is a Loving Provision”
in the April 15, 2015,
issue of The Watchtower.
It said: “Although Jehovah
does not demand perfection from us,
“he does have a standard of holiness
that he expects his servants to meet.
“For example, Jehovah insists
that we avoid such serious sins
“as sexual immorality, idolatry, thievery,
“extortion, murder, and spiritism.
“Would you not agree
that Jehovah’s clean standards
“are reasonable
and that they serve to protect us?
“Who does not prefer to live among peaceful,
decent people who can be trusted?
“We find such an environment
among our spiritual brothers and sisters,
“thanks to the promise we make
at the time of our dedication to God
to live in harmony
with the guidelines found in his Word.”
But now, what if a baptized Christian
commits a serious sin?
Does the congregation
disfellowship people
because they commit sexual immorality,
idolatry, thievery, extortion,
murder, spiritism, or something else?
Well, there’s more to it than that.
And the same article explains
that two factors must coincide
that result in the disfellowshipping
of one of Jehovah’s Witnesses:
“First, a baptized Witness
commits a serious sin.
Second, he does not repent of his sin.”
So individuals are disfellowshipped
only when they are unrepentant
of the sins they have committed,
and they cannot be reinstated
into the congregation
until the elders are convinced
that they are genuinely repentant.
Well, this presents a challenge to each of us
when it is a beloved friend or relative
who is disfellowshipped.
Will we be submissive and yield
to the judgment of the elders
who handle the matter?
We should accept the fact
that they are in a position
to be more objective than we are.
The elders pray hard about these decisions,
knowing that “they will render
an account” to God,
and that’s why they make every effort
to recover the erring one if possible.
But if that fails,
they must protect the congregation
and keep it morally clean.
But even then,
they kindly and clearly explain
the steps needed to be reinstated.
And they may periodically
visit the disfellowshipped person
to remind him or her
of the way back to Jehovah.
Now, if we yield to and support
the elders’ judgment,
we will actually be helping
a wrongdoer to benefit
from the discipline as coming from Jehovah.
And that’s so important for them to realize.
Look at Hebrews chapter 12.
Hebrews 12 starting with verse 5
—it says: “And you have entirely forgotten
“the exhortation that addresses you as sons:
“‘My son, do not belittle
the discipline from Jehovah,
“‘nor give up when you are corrected by him;
“‘for those whom
Jehovah loves he disciplines,
in fact, he scourges everyone
whom he receives as a son.’”
And then verse 11:
“True, no discipline seems for the present
to be joyous, but it is painful;
“yet afterward, it yields
the peaceable fruit of righteousness
to those who have been trained by it.”
So for disfellowshipped ones
who have been trained by the discipline,
it has helped them
to become spiritually restored.
So, what is the very best thing we can do
for those who are disfellowshipped?
We already read it at 1 Corinthians 5:11:
“Stop keeping company with [them] . . . ,
not even eating with [them].”
And speaking of the same sort of person,
the apostle John wrote at 2 John 10:
“Do not receive him into your homes
or say a greeting to him.”
Now, our loyalty is on the line,
not to the disfellowshipped person,
but to God,
who is watching to see whether
we will abide by his command
not to have contact with those
who are disfellowshipped.
Some of Jehovah’s people
may think this is too drastic
and that their keeping in contact
with the disfellowshipped friend or relative
is a kindness.
But they could not be more wrong about that.
You see, it may salve their own feelings,
but they would be
doing the worst possible thing
for the disfellowshipped person.
And Jesus did point out at Matthew 11:19:
“Wisdom is proved righteous by its results.”
We can share with you many fine examples
of the good that has resulted
when a family firmly and loyally
upholds Jehovah’s decree not to associate
with disfellowshipped ones.
One father said
that when his son began behaving
in a way that was unacceptable,
his lifestyle
had put up a barrier between them.
Now, note that the father
recognized that it was his son
who had created the barrier, not Jehovah.
After some ten years,
the young man cleaned up his life
and returned to the congregation,
and he admitted:
“Being disfellowshipped
brought me face-to-face
“with the consequences of my lifestyle.
I needed that sort of discipline.”
His father added: “Disfellowshipping
is an arrangement that we need,
“one that helps us live
according to Jehovah’s standards.
“In the long run, despite the pain,
it brings good results.
Had I been tolerant of my son’s bad conduct,
he would never have recovered.”
In another case, a sister admitted:
“Cutting ourselves off completely
“from all association
with [my disfellowshipped sister] . . .
“tested our loyalty to [God’s] arrangement.
“It gave [us] opportunity to show
that we really believe
that Jehovah’s way is best.”
And her reinstated sister later told her:
“If you had viewed
the disfellowshipping lightly,
“I know that I would not have taken steps
“toward reinstatement as soon as I did.
“Being totally cut off from loved ones
and from close contact with the congregation
“created a strong desire to repent.
“I realized just how wrong my course was
and how serious it was
to turn my back on Jehovah.”
We should think of these comments
if ever we are tempted
to violate God’s command
not to associate with disfellowshipped
friends or relatives.
The article I have quoted from also says:
“Disfellowshipped ones who are no longer
members of the . . . congregation . . .
“may come to realize what they have lost.
“The bitter fruits of their sinful course,
“together with the memories of happier days
“when they enjoyed a good relationship
with Jehovah and his people,
could bring them to their senses.”
Well, Jehovah knew what he was doing
when he inspired the anointed apostles
to write what they did
about not having any contact
with disfellowshipped wrongdoers.
Let’s always believe that.